 {llncs} {fontenc} } } In conversational search systems, a key component is to determine and clarify the intent behind complex queries. We view intent clarification in light of the paradigm, where users, through an iterative, evolving process of selection, exploration and retrieval, transform a visceral or conscious need into a formalized one. Augmenting the clarification component with a retrieval step can seriously enhance clarification performance, especially in domains where Large Language Models lack parametric knowledge. However, in more sensitive domains, such as healthcare, government or legal contexts, the retrieval database may contain sensitive information that needs protection. In this paper, we explore the research challenge of developing a retrieval-augmented conversational agent that can act as a mediator and gatekeeper for the sensitive collection. To do that, we also need to know what we are protecting and against what. We propose to tackle this research challenge in three steps: 1) define an attack model, 2) design sensitivity-aware defenses on the retrieval level and 3) develop evaluation methods to measure the trade-off between the level of protection and the system's utility. Recently, the field of information retrieval has experienced a paradigm shift from traditional search engines to conversational search interfaces . Instead of filtering and evaluating a ranked list of search results, these interfaces, nowadays powered by Large Language Models , provide users with direct, coherent and context-aware answers in natural language, mimicking human dialogue. A crucial step in conversational search is understanding and clarifying the user's intent, for example by asking clarifying questions . As it may be hard for users to formulate their complex information need into a single query, the system can decide to ask users questions to clarify their intent when the question is too ambiguous, faceted or broad . In recent work, instead of choosing from a pool of candidate questions, LLMs enable these systems to directly generate the next clarification step . We view intent clarification as a critical component of the exploratory search paradigm. Compared to `lookup' search , users engage in exploratory search to learn or investigate . At the lowest level, exploratory search may start with a visceral, inexpressible need, a vague sort of dissatisfaction, also coined an `anomalous state of knowledge' . Through an iterative process of selection, exploration and retrieval, users form a focus based on the information encountered and are then able to formally express their information need . Bates described this as `evolving search', in which the query itself is continuously changing, by collecting bits of information along the way, analogous to `berrypicking'. Previous studies have shown that retrieving relevant context, such as early result sets, can be beneficial for intent detection and clarification, for example in query expansion and pseudo-relevance feedback , intent classification and clarifying questions . This is especially important in situations with domain-specific information for which LLMs lack sufficient parametric knowledge. These domains, however, are sometimes sensitive or regulated, such as government, healthcare or legal contexts. Context information may live in private databases, not yet processed or publicly available. Systems must be aware of the potential leakage of sensitive information . This problem has previously led to research on privilege review in e-discovery , technology assisted sensitivity review and sensitivity-aware search . The sensitivity-aware use of information for LLM-based, retrieval-augmented intent clarification poses a challenge, as LLMs have been known to be able to leak various kinds of information and can be tricked into ignoring system instructions, an attack known as `jailbreaking' . In this paper, we set out to define the research challenge described above and propose a vision for sensitivity-aware, retrieval-augmented intent clarification agents that protect sensitive information in documents that should not be exposed in an exploratory clarification scenario. We show that the conversational agent must act as a mediator and gatekeeper between the user and sensitive document collection. Imagine a librarian with extensive knowledge of the library's book collection. A visitor comes in, wanting to discover new books on history. The librarian, helpful as they are, knows that there are thousands of history books and asks: "What time period of history are you interested in?" "Before Christ," the visitor answers. The librarian, narrowing down the potential books in their mind, knows that there are many popular books on Greeks or Romans and proceeds: "Are you looking for books on Greeks or Romans?" The visitor hesitates and then says: "Now that you say this, I remember a Babylonian king I wanted to know more about". The librarian now knows enough and shows the visitor to the section on Babylonia. This example resembles the process of exploratory search. The librarian and visitor `negotiated' an unclear need into a formalized one, with the librarian acting as a between the visitor and the book collection. Let's now consider another scenario. Several countries have legislation granting citizens the right to file information requests to the government, such as the Freedom of Information Act in the United States and the Wet open overheid in the Netherlands. Government officials, having knowledge of the available document collection, often proactively reach out to requesters to clarify or narrow down the scope of the request , similarly acting as a mediator between the requester and the document collection. The key difference between these two scenarios is that, unlike in a library, governmental documents may contain sensitive information, prohibiting disclosure. The mediator in these situations is therefore also a who decides which information may be shared with the requester. Suppose we want to automate this exploratory clarification process and build a generative conversational agent that can act as both a mediator and a sensitivity-aware gatekeeper to jointly clarify the search intent between a user and a sensitive set of documents. However, unlike a domain expert, a generic LLM may not have a good and reliable grasp of what information must be protected. Also, LLMs do not excel at keeping secrets. Like other machine learning models, they have been found to be prone to Membership Inference Attacks targeted at leaking training data , and they can be tricked into ignoring system instructions and guardrails . There have also been MIAs targeting Retrieval-Augmented Generation , aimed at inferring whether a piece of text was retrieved from a private database and used for answer generation . While these are closely related, as retrieval-augmented intent clarification can be viewed as an implementation of RAG, we argue that this exploratory process substantially differs from the generic Q\&A RAG pipeline and raises some interesting new challenges. Membership inference attacks on RAG systems detect leakage through retrieved content and generated answers, for example by explicitly asking about membership , letting the system fill in masked words or carefully crafting very specific questions that can only be answered if the target document is present . Compared to these `direct' attacks, an attack on the conversational intent clarification system cannot operate by directly asking or completing sentences. Instead, it must use indirect signals based on what the system asks rather than what it answers. To tackle the research challenge defined above, we need to work through three steps, described below. First, a clear definition of the attack model must be created. This includes the attacker's goal, knowledge and capabilities, as well as the full setup of the intent clarification system. This also requires a very careful description of exactly is considered sensitive information. Sensitivity can exist at different levels, such as individual passages of text, whole documents, or entire collections. A comprehensive study should define the attack and the granularity of sensitive information, and measure the effectiveness of the attack. Given a clear attack scenario, we can consider sensitivity-aware defenses. Existing tested or proposed defenses against MIA on RAG rely mostly on anomaly detection and guardrails in system prompts . We argue that relying on the LLM itself for defense is not future-proof and results in a cat-and-mouse game with the attacker. Instead, we propose to study new defenses on the . Previously, two paradigms, `protect-then-search' and `search-then-protect' have been proposed. The former means preprocessing the information into sensitivity-aware formats before searching, such as with technology-assisted sensitivity review , privacy-preserving text sanitization or automatic FOIA redaction . We propose another interesting direction, inspired by the notion of . This means creating abstractions of the documents - for example into topics, sentences or labels - to ensure that each document is indistinguishable from at least $k$ other documents. The `search-then-protect' approach relies on making the collection entirely accessible, hiding sensitive information when the system comes across it. An example of this is sensitivity-aware search . We also propose a new approach here, inspired by the notion of : adding noise to the retrieval results to add uncertainty about the membership of documents in the collection. We argue that the added noise may be acceptable in situations that do not rely on directly outputting factual information, such as clarifying questions. To evaluate the interventions, we need to define new evaluation methods that measure the trade-off between the level of protection and the utility of the system. For protection, we can use the success rate of attacks and rely on the privacy guarantees of the interventions and measure the utility at multiple privacy budgets. For utility, we propose to focus on the effect of the intent clarification process on a downstream task, such as relevant document retrieval. Two potential datasets with annotations on sensitivity and relevance are Avocado and SARA . This paper has set out a research challenge to develop sensitivity-aware interventions on top of a generative conversational agent, functioning as a mediator and gatekeeper between the user and a private document collection, to benefit from retrieval-augmented exploratory intent clarification while aiming to protect information in documents that should not be exposed. We propose to tackle this research challenge in three steps: 1) provide a clear definition of the attack model, 2) design sensitivity-aware interventions on the retrieval level and 3) develop evaluation methods to measure the trade-off between the level of protection and the utility of the system. 