 {IEEEtran} -.08em T -.1667em .7ex -.125emX}} Milind Pandurang Jagre} \\ m\_jagre@apple.com} Jia Huang} \\ jiahuang2016@gmail.com} Dayvid V. R. Oliveira} \\ dvro@apple.com} Zhinan Cheng} \\ jzcheng96@gmail.com} Babak Seyed Aghazadeh} \\ babak9796@gmail.com} Puja Das} \\ pdas3@apple.com} Chris Alvino} \\ calvino@apple.com} Jinda Han} \\ jinda\_han@apple.com} Kailash Thiyagarajan} \\ k\_thiyagarajan@apple.com} } In search and recommendation systems, predictive models often suffer from temporal instability when certain input features introduce volatility in output scores. This instability can degrade model reliability and user experience especially in multi-stage systems where consistent predictions are critical for downstream decision making. We introduce Fortress, a general framework for enhancing model stability and accuracy by identifying and pruning features that contribute to inconsistent prediction scores over time. Fortress leverages historical snapshots temporally partitioned datasets capturing score fluctuations for the same entity across periods and follows a four-step process: collect historical snapshots, identify samples with unstable predictions, isolate and remove instability- inducing features, and retrain models using only stable features. While semantic features from LLMs and BERT-based models improve generalization, they often lack full query or entity coverage. Engagement-based features offer strong predictive power but tend to introduce temporal instability. Fortress mitigates this trade-off by suppressing the volatility of engagement signals while retaining their predictive value leading to more stable and accurate models. We validate Fortress on a query-to-app relevance model in a large-scale app marketplace. Offline experiments demonstrate notable improvements in prediction stability and classification performance . Recommendation systems must provide not only relevant results, but also consistent and predictable ones. Instability in model predictions where the same query-app pair yields significantly different scores across time can lead to poor user experience and undermine trust in the system. While recent advancements in LLM-based features have improved contextual relevance , engineered features derived from organic user engagement behavior continue to play a crucial role . However, these features can introduce temporal inconsistencies that affect score stability. Model instability often arises when certain features cause the output score to vary across temporal snapshots, leading to inconsistent user experiences. In search-based recommendation systems, these score fluctuations can cause items to alternate between being shown and not shown in search results. Such instability can affect the overall quality of the recommendations, leading to a less consistent and predictable user experience. In this work, we present Fortress, a generalizable framework for improving model prediction stability through feature selection by leveraging historical snapshots of model inputs and outputs over time. The core insight is that some features though potentially predictive in isolated snapshots may introduce volatility across time. By identifying and pruning such features, we can enhance both model robustness and accuracy. This method fits into the broader class of “wrapper” feature selection methods, where a feature subset is selected based on validation performance, as introduced in . A review of feature selection methods can be found in . We evaluate this method on a relevance prediction task for an app marketplace, where the goal is to classify query-app pairs as relevant or not. While this case study grounds the methodology, the technique is broadly applicable to any scenario where a scoring model evaluates the same entity over time, such as user-item recommendations. Our results show improved prediction consistency as measured by decreased Coefficient of Variation and improved classification performance as measured by increased PR-AUC. Our method assumes that certain features may lead to unstable predictions when used in model scoring across time. We define a feature as unstable if its inclusion causes prediction volatility across historical snapshots for the same entity. Historical snapshots are temporally partitioned datasets contiguous intervals over a time period allowing us to evaluate prediction consistency for entities scored multiple times. {multi-snapshot3.png} We demonstrate the method using a dataset of query-app pairs from a major commercial app marketplace. Human raters label each pair as BAD, ACCEPTABLE, GOOD, or EXCELLENT. To simplify evaluation, we treat this as a classification task where the model learns to filter out BAD pairs. We utilized a quarter of the data, consisting of daily snapshots, for training and validation purposes. The entire dataset was divided into training, test, and validation datasets, following the industry standard of 70\ Our evaluation metrics include PR-AUC to assess classification performance, and Coefficient of Variation to measure score stability, defined as standard deviation divided by mean for prediction scores across snapshots. The proposed method proceeds as follows: Obtain multiple snapshots over time. Each entity and its snapshot data is assigned to a single data partition. Identify unstable samples with high score variance across snapshots. Identify and remove features that contribute to instability while offering limited performance gain. Retrain the model using the reduced feature set and all snapshots. To determine which features to remove, we first identify samples corresponding to the 75th percentile highest CV across temporal snapshots. For these high-variance samples, we compute the CV for each feature individually. Features with the highest CVs are considered candidates for pruning. However, we only proceed with feature removal if doing so results in statistically significant improved PR-AUC on the validation set as compared to baseline. We employ a greedy search approach to compute the CV by iteratively removing features deemed for pruning during model retraining without those features. This process continues until the pruned feature list is exhausted, and we achieve a statistically significant PR-AUC lift. This is particularly important in systems with multi-stage retrieval and ranking pipelines, where instability in prediction scores can propagate through downstream stages and cause significant shifts in overall system behavior. We evaluated our method using an XGBoost classifier to predict an app relevance in the context of a query, by training on largely, two categories of features, Semantic Representation : LLM-based and DistilBERT based features and Engagement features. We used two types of SR features. The first is an LLM-based feature designed to capture query-to-app similarity independent of engagement signals. For this, the system employs a proprietary Foundation Model , which leverages query and app metadata to generate relevance scores. The second is based on a DistilBERT model in a two-tower architecture trained with triplet loss, where the model learns to embed queries and items such that relevant pairs are closer and irrelevant pairs are pushed further apart in the embedding space. The engagement features are non-personalized and based on highly aggregated historical user interactions with the query-app pair . Our model consisted of around 25 features, which were refreshed several times daily and are the main source of predicted score instability. XGBoost was selected for its speed and robustness to noise. As is typical in classification modeling, we interpret the output score as a probability and use that score in our recommendation system where stability is desirable. Table I summarizes results for the following: {!}{ {|l|c|c|} & The results show that while adding engagement features improves PR-AUC, it also increases score volatility. Multi-snapshot training mitigates some of that instability. Our proposed method, with both multi-snapshot and removal of unstable features, improves score volatility by 3.44\ As a downstream effect of the improved prediction score stability, Table II presents the relative improvement of Fortress compared to the single-snapshot approach. In particular, it shows the relative reduction in the number of pairs that exhibit flip-flop instability across time that is, pairs that appear in the final stage of our recommendation system in one historical snapshot but are absent in another. This metric reflects the system-level impact of more stable predictions on the consistency of recommendations over time. The results show a consistent improvement across regions, along with a healthy global gain in stability for our recommendation system. Here, 'regions' refer to groups of countries; Exact country groups are proprietary and have been masked. {|l|c|} & \\ Region 1 & 14.7\ Region 2 & 17.0\ Region 3 & 29.2\ Region 4 & 49.6\ Region 5 & 28.0\ Region 6 & 38.2\ & Interestingly, some features that appeared beneficial in a single snapshot were found to degrade performance when evaluated across time. This reinforces the value of temporal multi-snapshot analysis for robust feature selection. Semantic features, for example LLM-based features tend to be more stable across time, as content embeddings and app metadata change slowly unless retrained. However, relying solely on LLM-based features can overlook key signals from user behavior. These features are also dependent on the underlying dataset snapshot on which the model was trained and can sometimes be limited in their knowledge or coverage (approx. 80\ Delivering a high-quality user experience requires recommendation systems to produce results that are both relevant and consistent. While engagement-based features enhance model accuracy, they can introduce prediction instability over time. We proposed Fortress, a general framework for improving model stability by performing temporal data augmentation and pruning features that contribute to score inconsistency, while preserving overall prediction accuracy. Using historical snapshots, we identified prediction-volatility-inducing features and retrained models without them. This method improved both model stability and classification performance in our case study and is applicable to a broad range of recommendation systems where scoring consistency matters. In multistage retrieval and ranking systems, volatility in production scores can lead to undesirable shifts in system dynamics and user experience resulting in suboptimal outcomes. Our approach applies to such systems, where maintaining scoring stability is critical to ensuring reliability and performance. {00} Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. 2016. Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system. In Proceedings of the 22nd acm sigkdd international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining. 785–794. Wenqi Fan. 2024. Recommender systems in the era of large language models . IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering , 1–20. Tom Gunter, Zirui Wang, Chong Wang, Ruoming Pang, Andy Narayanan, Aonan Zhang, Bowen Zhang, Chen Chen, Chung-Cheng Chiu, David Qiu, et al. 2024. Apple Intelligence Foundation Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21075 . https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21075 Yupeng Hou, Junjie Zhang, Zihan Lin, Hongyu Lu, Ruobing Xie, Julian McAuley, and Wayne Xin Zhao. 2024. Large language models are zero-shot rankers for recommender systems. In European Conference on Information Retrieval. Springer, 364–381. Gareth James, Daniela Witten, Trevor Hastie, and Robert Tibshirani. 2013. An Introduction to Statistical Learning. Springer, New York. Ron Kohavi and George H. John. 1997. Wrappers for feature subset selection. In Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 97. 273–324. Xueting Lin, Zhan Cheng, Longfei Yun, Qingyi Lu, and Yuanshuai Luo. 2024. Enhanced Recommendation Combining Collaborative Filtering and Large Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.18713 . Zhen Qin, Rolf Jagerman, Kai Hui, Honglei Zhuang, Junru Wu, Le Yan, Jiaming Shen, Tianqi Liu, Jialu Liu, Donald Metzler, et al. 2023. Large language models are effective text rankers with pairwise ranking prompting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.17563 . Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and Thomas Wolf. 2019. DistilBERT, a distilled version of BERT: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01108 . Junyi Shen, Dayvid VR Oliveira, Jin Cao, Brian Knott, Goodman Gu, Sindhu Vijaya Raghavan, Yunye Jin, Nikita Sudan, and Rob Monarch. 2023. Identifying Controversial Pairs in Item-to-Item Recommendations. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. 671–674. J. Tang, S. Alelyani, and H. Liu. 2014. Data Classification: Algorithms and Ap- plications. CRC Press, Chapter Feature selection for classification: a review, 37–64. Jianling Wang, Haokai Lu, Yifan Liu, He Ma, Yueqi Wang, Yang Gu, Shuzhou Zhang, Ningren Han, Shuchao Bi, Lexi Baugher, et al. 2024. Llms for user interest exploration in large-scale recommendation systems. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. 872–877. Likang Wu et al. 2023. A Survey on Large Language Models for Recommendation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.19860 . https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.19860 Xiaochuan Xu, Zeqiu Xu, Peiyang Yu, and Jiani Wang. 2025. Enhancing user intent for recommendation systems via large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.10871 . Xinyi Zhang, Chenshuo Sun, Renyu Zhang, and Khim-Yong Goh. 2024. The Value of AI-Generated Metadata for UGC Platforms: Evidence from a Large-scale Field Experiment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.18337 . 