 {acmart} }} {Proceedings of the 49th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval}{July 20--24, 2026}{Melbourne, VIC, Australia} } } } } } } {Chenglong Ma et al.} Large-language-model based user simulation is increasingly adopted for evaluating search engines, recommender systems, and retrieval-augmented generation pipelines, yet most simulators remain opaque: it is difficult to determine a simulated user made a particular choice or whether that choice is consistent with the intended user profile. Compounding this, recent research shows that LLMs can produce biased or discriminatory responses depending on user background characteristics such as language, education level, and cultural context, raising concerns about the equitable treatment of minority and disadvantaged groups. This half-day, in-person tutorial introduces a proposed design-and-audit framework that treats a user simulator as a composed of seven auditable components---structured Persona, task-aware Contract, matched human-vs-agent Execution, auditable Trace, persona-aligned Verification, structured Feedback, and a Refinement loop that updates personas and contracts. Through two hands-on mini-labs on recommendation-list evaluation and search-query formulation, participants will inspect simulator behaviour end-to-end, distinguish diagnostic discrepancy analysis from statistical validation, and apply checks for fidelity, credibility, and demographic bias. The tutorial targets information retrieval and recommender systems researchers and practitioners interested in user behaviour simulation and responsible AI. <ccs2012> <concept> <concept_id>10002951.10003317.10003359</concept_id> <concept_desc>Information systems~Evaluation of retrieval results</concept_desc> <concept_significance>300</concept_significance> </concept> <concept> <concept_id>10002951.10003317.10003347.10003350</concept_id> <concept_desc>Information systems~Recommender systems</concept_desc> <concept_significance>500</concept_significance> </concept> <concept> <concept_id>10010147.10010178</concept_id> <concept_desc>Computing methodologies~Artificial intelligence</concept_desc> <concept_significance>300</concept_significance> </concept> <concept> <concept_id>10003120.10003121</concept_id> <concept_desc>Human-centered computing~Human computer interaction </concept_desc> <concept_significance>300</concept_significance> </concept> </ccs2012> {Information systems~Evaluation of retrieval results} {Information systems~Recommender systems} {Computing methodologies~Artificial intelligence} {Human-centered computing~Human computer interaction } This half-day tutorial presents a proposed framework for building and auditing LLM-based user simulators for search and recommendation systems. It combines three concise lecture segments with two hands-on mini-labs in which participants use a browser-based environment to construct personas, specify task contracts, compare human and agent behaviour, inspect traces, and refine simulator specifications. All presenters will attend and deliver the tutorial on-site. The tutorial includes short Q\&A and setup checkpoints before the hands-on activities. The intended audience is intermediate: information retrieval and recommender systems researchers, practitioners, and graduate students interested in LLM-based user simulation, evaluation methodology, fairness auditing, or human-centred AI. Participants should be familiar with core information retrieval or recommender systems concepts such as queries, relevance, ranking, search engine result pages, and collaborative or content-based filtering. No prior experience with LLM prompting, agent design, or simulation frameworks is assumed. An earlier 75-minute version was delivered at the ARC Centre of Excellence for Automated Decision-Making \& Society Summer School .} in Melbourne in 2026 to approximately 50 participants from information retrieval, media, and social science. Feedback from that session motivated a deeper treatment of verification methodology and additional hands-on work. The SIGIR version expands the session into a half-day tutorial by adding a full treatment of the seven-component verification framework, two structured mini-labs, and explicit coverage of fairness verification and demographic-bias detection~. User simulation has a long history in information retrieval evaluation, including pre-LLM simulation of interactive search behaviour~. LLMs have changed the design space by making it easier to instantiate persona-conditioned agents for offline evaluation of search engines, recommender systems, and retrieval-augmented generation pipelines~. Recent studies show that LLMs can produce behavioural patterns resembling human samples~ and sustain coherent personas across extended interactions~. These capabilities have accelerated their use for relevance assessment, query generation, click modelling, conversational evaluation, and other settings where collecting real user data is costly, slow, or ethically constrained. The apparent fidelity of simulated behaviour can be misleading. Current simulators are often opaque: researchers cannot easily determine why an agent made a choice, whether that choice follows the intended user profile, or how sensitive the outcome is to prompts, model selection, and decoding parameters. At the same time, evidence shows that LLM responses can vary with language, education level, culture, and other user background characteristics, producing biased or discriminatory outcomes~. In search and recommendation, such variation can distort evaluation results and lead to unfair treatment of minority or disadvantaged groups. Without traceable evidence and verification checks, simulation-driven evaluation rests on assumptions that are difficult to reproduce or audit. We therefore treat a user simulator as a : a system whose behaviour can be inspected, attributed, and systematically improved. We present the seven-component decomposition below as a practical design and audit framework. Its purpose in the tutorial is to give participants a vocabulary and workflow for making simulation assumptions explicit. {0pt} structured, editable user attributes, including demographics, preferences, knowledge level, and interaction style. task-specific constraints and preferences that scope the simulation without overfitting to a single scenario. matched human and persona-conditioned agent runs on the same task, enabling behavioural comparison. auditable records of inputs, actions, rationales, timestamps, model identifiers, and provider configurations. persona-aligned checks for fidelity, credibility, fairness, and the source of observed discrepancies, rather than accuracy alone. attributable evidence identifying where a persona, contract, or agent output failed. an update loop that revises personas and contracts based on verification outcomes. The framework is grounded in two domains. In recommendation-list evaluation, participants act as an assigned persona, choose items from a fixed list, and compare their selections with an LLM agent's trace. In search-query formulation, participants generate queries from a backstory and verify agent-generated queries against the same persona specification. A single human--agent comparison is not presented as statistical validation; it is used as a diagnostic probe. Participants label discrepancies as likely agent deviation, persona ambiguity, contract underspecification, role-player interpretation, or model stochasticity, and then discuss what evidence would be needed for stronger empirical claims. Both tasks run in a browser-based environment and require no external API access during the session. By the end of the tutorial, participants will be able to: {0pt} define structured personas and task-aware contracts for simulation studies; design matched human and agent execution protocols for controlled behavioural comparison; collect and inspect execution traces that support reproducibility and post-hoc analysis; apply verification checks for persona fidelity, rationale credibility, fairness, and discrepancy attribution; identify cases where simulated behaviour varies systematically with language, culture, education level, or other background attributes; and use structured feedback to refine personas and contracts across simulation rounds while separating pedagogical inspection from population-level validation. User simulation has long been part of SIGIR's evaluation methodology, including simulated interaction for search evaluation~ and recent workshops and tutorials on LLM-based evaluation for search and recommendation~. The rapid adoption of LLM agents has increased the need for practical methods that make simulated behaviour reproducible, interpretable, and fair. Several presenters have also worked on LLM-based user simulation for recommender system evaluation, including personality-driven and temporal-aware simulators~. This tutorial complements prior work that surveys simulation techniques or focuses on specific application domains~. Its focus is verification: how to inspect simulator outputs, attribute behaviour to persona and contract choices, and decide whether the resulting evidence is credible enough to support an evaluation claim. The tutorial also places fairness auditing inside the core simulation workflow, reflecting growing evidence that LLM-based simulators can amplify demographic biases when left unchecked~. The material is relevant to researchers designing simulation-based evaluation, practitioners building LLM-driven search or recommendation systems, and reviewers assessing the credibility of simulation studies. It aligns with SIGIR's broader interest in reproducible evaluation~ and responsible deployment of generative models in information access systems. The tutorial is an in-person half-day session of 180 minutes. It interleaves short lectures with hands-on work so that each conceptual block is followed by practice on a concrete simulation task. Short question and setup checkpoints are included before each mini-lab. {2pt} Tutorial goals, logistics, and overview of the seven-component framework. Brief pre-LLM context, structured persona attributes, persona libraries, task-aware contracts, and examples from search and recommendation. Clarify concepts and ensure participants can access the web environment. Matched human--agent runs, trace-schema design, and recording of actions, rationales, timestamps, and model configurations. Resolve setup issues and preview the first mini-lab workflow. Participants act as an assigned persona, select items from a fixed recommendation list, compare their selections with an LLM agent, inspect the trace, classify discrepancies, and complete a short debrief. Fidelity, credibility, fairness, discrepancy attribution, evidence linked feedback, and the persona/contract update loop. Clarify the verification rubric before the second mini-lab. Participants formulate queries from an assigned backstory, compare them with agent-generated queries, apply verification checks, and draft structured feedback. An optional extension uses a fixed corpus and BM25 result page for result selection and query reformulation. Synthesis, open Q\&A, and structured participant feedback. The session includes 85 minutes of mini-lab work, 15 minutes of closing discussion, and 15 minutes of explicit question/setup checkpoints. This design keeps more than half of the tutorial participant-active while reducing the risk that browser or task-access issues consume lab time. All materials will be prepared in advance and distributed at the start of the session. The package includes a slide deck, a hands-on workbook, reusable Persona and Contract JSON schemas, a Trace schema, verification rubrics, feedback forms, and an annotated reading list. The workbook provides step-by-step instructions for both mini-labs and is designed to remain useful as a template for participants' own evaluation workflows. The verification rubric asks participants to record the evidence for each judgement and to separate agent errors from ambiguous personas, underspecified contracts, human role-playing variance, and model stochasticity. The hands-on activities use a browser-based demo environment at . The environment provides persona and contract editors, recommendation lists, search backstories, pre-generated LLM agent outputs, trace viewers, evaluation results, feedback views, and refined persona editing. Participants need only a laptop or tablet with web access; all computation is server-side. A downloadable offline backup will be available for connectivity failures. After the tutorial, slides, workbooks, schemas, and a recorded summary video will be released at . This release is intended to support reuse by researchers conducting simulation-based evaluation or adapting the framework to their own IR and RecSys pipelines. Slides and workbooks will be reviewed for accessible contrast, font size, and screen-reader compatibility. Tutorial activities use synthetic personas by default and can be completed without submitting identifiable information. Any optional collection of anonymised interaction traces for improving the platform will be subject to RMIT Human Research Ethics review and the safeguards required by that process. Fairness discussions will focus on trace-based auditing, measurement choices, and feedback-loop controls rather than individual-level labelling. The presenter team combines expertise in information retrieval, recommender systems, human-centred AI, responsible AI, and empirical evaluation. The team has published related work on personality-driven and temporal-aware LLM user simulation for recommender system evaluation~ and has prior experience delivering the material in an interactive summer-school setting. Chenglong Ma is a Research Fellow at the RMIT University node of the ADM+S Centre, specialising in user simulation and evaluation methods for recommendation and search systems. His work focuses on verifiable, persona-conditioned simulation and fairness-aware evaluation. He has experience delivering interactive research sessions, including a 75-minute workshop at the ADM+S Centre Summer School on verifiable user simulation. He also has 4 years of teaching experience in practical data science. Xinye Wanyan is a PhD student at the RMIT University node of the ADM+S Centre, where her PhD research focuses on user behaviour simulation for the evaluation of recommender systems. Her current work introduces a temporal-aware mechanism that enables agents to model evolving user behaviour based on historical interactions. She also designs automated user-profile generation methods to bridge the gap between interaction sequences and agent personas, improving the realism and effectiveness of simulated users. Danula Hettiachchi is a Lecturer in the School of Computing Technologies at RMIT University and an Associate Investigator at ADM+S. His research spans crowdsourcing, social computing, HCI, and responsible AI, with a focus on designing and analysing human studies and auditing human--AI decision processes. He brings experience in delivering and supporting interactive teaching and community-facing tutorial activities. Ziqi Xu is a Lecturer in the School of Computing Technologies at RMIT University. His research focuses on responsible AI, including fairness, causal inference, and explainable machine learning, with recent work on evaluation methodologies and LLM-based user behaviour simulation for recommendation and information retrieval. He teaches across data science and machine learning subjects, supporting hands-on tutorial delivery. Yongli Ren is an Associate Professor in the School of Computing Technologies at RMIT University. His research focuses on trustworthy and equitable recommender systems, including bias detection and mitigation, transparency, and explanation, as well as simulation-based evaluation with controllable LLM user simulators beyond accuracy-only metrics. He has extensive teaching experience and has received multiple teaching awards at RMIT. Jeffrey Chan is a Professor in the School of Computing Technologies at RMIT University. His research interests lie in machine learning, recommender systems, responsible AI, data-driven optimisation and interdisciplinary research that combines these fields to solve social and industry-based applications. He has worked with industry and non-profit partners in sustainability, manufacturing and health. This work was conducted at the ARC Centre of Excellence for Automated Decision-Making and Society and funded by the Australian Research Council . It was supported by computing resources from RACE and RMIT's Enabling Impact Platforms. This research was undertaken on the unceded lands of the Woi wurrung and Boon wurrung language groups of the eastern Kulin Nation. We pay our respects to Elders past and present, and to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples and their continuing connections to land, sea, sky, and community. 